PR 1: Create Cloud Account and Explore Google Cloud Console

STEPS:
1. Open website - https://www.skills.google
2. Click on "Sign in" - Select "Sign in with Google".
3. Sign in using your Google account / college Google account.
4. Google Skills provides free learning opportunities. Students can use the available free monthly learning credits to access Google Skills courses and hands-on labs. The current Google Cloud Innovators program provides 35 learning credits every month.
5. After signing in to Google Skills, open the Google Cloud website - https://cloud.google.com/
6. Click on "Sign in" at the top-right corner and sign in with your Google account.
7. Open Google Skills again - https://www.skills.google
8. From the left panel - Select "Catalog".
9. In the "What you want to learn today" search box, type "cloud console" or "Google Cloud".
10. Select a beginner Google Cloud / Cloud Console lab or learning activity available in Google Skills.
11. Open the selected lab and click on "Start Lab".
12. If the lab asks for credits, select "Launch with 1 Credit" or the available launch option.
13. Wait until the lab starts successfully.
14. The lab page will display temporary Username, Password, and Project ID. These credentials are provided for the lab.
15. Copy the temporary "Username", "Password", and "Project ID" from the Google Skills page.
16. Right-click on "Open Google Cloud Console" and select "Open link in new tab".
17. The Google Cloud Console will open. The official console address is https://console.cloud.google.com.
18. If a Google sign-in page appears, enter the temporary Username provided by Google Skills.
19. Enter the temporary Password provided by Google Skills.
20. Select "I Understand" if the Google Cloud welcome message is displayed.
21. If "Terms of Service" is displayed, select the check box and click "Agree and continue".
22. Click on "Select a Project" at the top of the Google Cloud Console.
23. Select the Project ID provided by Google Skills, such as "qwiklabs-gcp-.....".
24. Check the project name and Project ID shown at the top of the console before using any service.
25. From the navigation menu (☰), explore "Compute Engine". Do not create a VM in this practical.
26. From the navigation menu, open "Cloud Storage" and observe the available storage and bucket options. Do not create a bucket.
27. From the navigation menu, open "IAM & Admin" and select "IAM" to view users, roles, and permissions.
28. From the navigation menu, open "Cloud Run" and observe the service deployment options. Do not deploy a service.
29. From the navigation menu, open "Kubernetes Engine (GKE)" and observe the cluster options. Do not create a cluster.
30. From the navigation menu, open "Cloud Functions" / "Functions" and observe the available function options. Do not deploy a function.
31. From the navigation menu, open "Monitoring" and explore the Cloud Monitoring dashboard and available monitoring options.
32. From the navigation menu, open "Logging" and explore Logs Explorer.
33. At the top-right of the Google Cloud Console, click "Activate Cloud Shell" (terminal icon).
34. Wait for Cloud Shell to start. Cloud Shell provides a browser-based terminal with the Google Cloud CLI (gcloud) available.
35. If an "Authorize Cloud Shell" message appears, click "Authorize".
36. In Cloud Shell, type the following command and press Enter: gcloud auth list
37. Verify that an active account is displayed with an asterisk (*) under ACTIVE.
38. In Cloud Shell, type the following command and press Enter: gcloud config get-value project
39. Verify that the correct Project ID is displayed.
40. Students can now explore the above Google Cloud Platform (GCP) services and observe their menus, dashboards, configuration options, and basic features.



PR 2:Create and configure Compute Engine VM instance

STEPS:
1.	Open website - https://www.skills.google
2.	Click on Sign - Select Sign in with Google
3.	From left panel - Select "Catalog"
4.	Type "cloud virtual machine" - in "What you want to learn today" search box
5.	Select "virtual machine" from search
6.	Select "Create virtual machine"
7.	Select "Start Lab"
8.	Select "Launch with 1 Credit"
9.	Right click on “Open Google Cloud Console” button and select “Open link in new Tab”
10.	You can find Username, Password, and Project ID
11.	Copy "username" and "password" from "skills.google" website
12.	Use them to "Sign in"
13.	Select "I Understand" button
14.	Select check box "Terms of Service" - "Click on Agree and continue"
15.	Click on "Select a Project" - One Dialog box will open
16.	Select project ID such as "qwicklabs-gcp-....." if not selected.
17.	Select “Compute Engine” from left panel.
18.	Select “Create Instance” from top.
19.	In Machine Configuration.
a)	Name: linux-vm-1
 
b)	Region: choose any (e.g., us-central1) or do not change.
c)	Zone: do not change.
20.	From options: select General Purpose

a)	Series: E2
b)	Machine type: e2-medium (Good default, low cost)


21.	From left panel select “OS and Storage”
22.	Click on “Change” button

23.	Select bellow options:
a)	Operating system: Ubuntu
b)	Version: Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
c)	Boot disk type: Balanced persistent disk
d)	Size: 10 GB
24.	From left panel select “Networking”
 
25.	Select check box of: (If you want to run web server) Allow HTTP traffic
Allow HTTPS traffic
26.	Click on “Create” to create VM
27.	Click on SSH to run Linux server in browser

28.	Using SSH browser you can
a)	Update the OS
b)	Install / remove packages
c)	Manage users and permissions
29.	Select the check box against the VM name

30.	Now, you can Start, Stop, Suspend (OS is not Shut down), reset (restart).
31.	From More actions: Select “Delete”
32.	Click on “Delete” button.


CNA (Practical-3)
PR 3: Create and manage Cloud Storage bucket
STEPS:
1. Open website - https://www.skills.google
2. Click on Sign in - Select Sign in with Google
3. From left panel - Select "Catalog"
4. Type "cloud storage" in the search box
5. Select "Cloud Storage" related lab from search results
6. Select "Start Lab"
7. Select "Launch with 1 Credit"
8. Right click on "Open Google Cloud Console" and open in new tab
9. Copy Username, Password and Project ID from Skills Boost
10. Sign in to Google Cloud Console using the provided credentials
11. Select "I Understand"
12. Select the check box for "Terms of Service" - Click on "Agree and Continue"
13. Click on "Select a Project" - Select the provided Project ID
14. From Navigation Menu, select "Cloud Storage" → "Buckets"
15. Click on "Create Bucket"
16. Enter Bucket Name: static-website-bucket-unique
17. Choose Region: us-central1 (or default)
18. Select Standard Storage Class
19. Choose Uniform Access Control
20. Click on "Create"
21. Open the created bucket
22. Click on "Upload Files"
23. Upload index.html file
24. Upload style.css and image files, if any
25. Open "Bucket Settings"
26. Click on "Edit Website Configuration"
27. Set Main Page: index.html
28. Set Not Found Page: 404.html (optional)
29. Click on "Save Changes"
30. Go to "Permissions" tab
31. Grant access to allUsers with Storage Object Viewer role
32. Confirm "Public Access"
33. Open "Objects" tab and verify the uploaded files
34. Click on the website URL or public URL
35. Verify that the static website loads successfully
36. Modify the HTML file and re-upload it to test updates
37. After verification, delete the uploaded files if required
38. Delete the bucket to avoid unnecessary resource usage


CNA (Practical-4)

PR 4: Configure IAM Users, Roles, and Service Accounts

STEPS:
1. Open website - https://www.skills.google
2. Click on Sign - Select "Sign in with Google".
3. From the left panel - Select "Catalog".
4. Type "IAM" or "Identity and Access Management" in the "What you want to learn today" search box.
5. Select a suitable IAM lab related to users, roles, or service accounts.
6. Select "Start Lab".
7. Select "Launch with 1 Credit" if the lab provides this option.
8. Right click on "Open Google Cloud Console" and select "Open link in new Tab".
9. You can find Username, Password, and Project ID on the Skills Boost page.
10. Copy the temporary Username and Password from the Skills Boost page.
11. Use them to sign in to the Google Cloud Console.
12. Select "I Understand" if shown.


13. Select the check box for "Terms of Service" and click "Agree and continue" if shown.
14. Click on "Select a Project" and select the temporary project ID such as "qwiklabs-gcp-.....".
15. From the Google Cloud Console, open "IAM & Admin".
16. Select "IAM".
17. Observe the list of IAM principals. A principal can be a user, group, service account, or other supported identity.
18. Review the roles already assigned to the principals.
19. Do not use basic roles such as Owner, Editor, or Viewer when a more limited predefined role is sufficient.
20. Click "Grant Access" or "Grant access" to add a principal.
21. In "New principals", enter the test user/principal provided by the lab, if available.
22. Under "Assign roles", select a predefined role with only the permissions required for the activity. For example, use a service-specific Viewer role instead of the broad Viewer basic role.
23. Click "Save".
24. Check the IAM table and confirm that the principal now has the limited role.


25. Open "IAM & Admin" and select "Service Accounts".
26. Click "Create Service Account".
27. Enter a simple name, for example: "cna-practical4-sa".
28. Enter a short description such as "Test service account for IAM practical".
29. Click "Create and Continue".
30. Grant only the minimum predefined role required by the lab/activity. Do not give Owner or Editor unless the lab specifically requires it.
31. Click "Continue" and then "Done".
32. Open the newly created service account and review its details and assigned permissions.
33. Do NOT create or download a service account key. Use the service account through Google Cloud IAM instead.
34. Go back to "IAM & Admin" and open "IAM Recommender" if it is available.
35. Review the concept of IAM Recommender: it can suggest reducing or changing permissions that appear unnecessary.
36. Open "Policy Analyzer" if it is available in the lab/project.


37. Review the concept of Policy Analyzer: it helps analyze who has access to which Google Cloud resources through IAM policies.
38. Return to the IAM page and review the temporary access added during the practical.
39. Remove the temporary/test principal or role that is no longer required.
40. Go to "IAM & Admin" → "Service Accounts".
41. Select the test service account "cna-practical4-sa" or the service account created during the lab.
42. Click "Delete" and confirm the deletion of the test service account.
43. Verify that the temporary IAM access and test service account have been removed.

Note: Use only the temporary project and credentials provided by the lab. Give principals and service accounts the least privilege required, and remove test access after completing the practical.


CNA (Practical-5)

PR 5: Create Docker Images and Run Containers on Cloud VM

STEPS:
1. Open website - https://www.skills.google
2. Click on Sign - Select "Sign in with Google".
3. From the left panel - Select "Catalog".
4. Type "Docker" or "Docker containers" in the "What you want to learn today" search box.
5. Select a suitable lab related to running Docker containers on a Google Cloud VM.
6. Select "Start Lab".
7. Select "Launch with 1 Credit" if the lab provides this option.
8. Right click on "Open Google Cloud Console" and select "Open link in new Tab".
9. You can find Username, Password, and Project ID on the Skills Boost page.
10. Copy the temporary Username and Password from the Skills Boost page.
11. Use them to sign in to the Google Cloud Console.
12. Select "I Understand" if shown.
13. Select the check box for "Terms of Service" and click "Agree and continue" if shown.
14. Click on "Select a Project" and select the temporary project ID such as "qwiklabs-gcp-.....".
15. Select "Compute Engine" from the left panel.
16. Select "VM instances".
17. Select the VM created for the Docker practical. If no VM is available, create a small Linux VM using the lab instructions.
18. Click on "SSH" to open the Linux terminal in the browser.
19. Check whether Docker is already installed by typing: docker --version
20. If Docker is not installed, install Docker Engine using the commands/instructions provided by the lab.
21. After installation, verify Docker by typing: docker --version
22. Create a new folder for the Node.js application by typing: mkdir docker-node-app
23. Move into the folder by typing: cd docker-node-app
24. Create a Node.js application file by typing: nano app.js
25. Enter the following simple Node.js application code:
const http = require("http");
const server = http.createServer((req, res) => { res.end("Hello from Docker on Cloud VM!"); });
server.listen(3000, "0.0.0.0", () => console.log("Server running on port 3000"));
29. Save the file and exit the editor.
30. Create a package file by typing: nano package.json
31. Enter the following content: {"scripts":{"start":"node app.js"}}
32. Save the file and exit the editor.
33. Create a Dockerfile by typing: nano Dockerfile
34. Enter the following Dockerfile instructions:
FROM node:20-alpine
WORKDIR /app
COPY package.json .
COPY app.js .
EXPOSE 3000
CMD ["npm", "start"]
41. Save the Dockerfile and exit the editor.
42. Create a .dockerignore file by typing: nano .dockerignore
43. Add the following entries: node_modules and npm-debug.log
44. Save the file and exit the editor.
45. Check the files in the folder by typing: ls -la
46. Build a Docker image by typing: docker build -t node-cloud-app .
47. Wait for the image build to complete successfully.
48. Check the created image by typing: docker images
49. Run a container from the image and map VM port 3000 to container port 3000 by typing: docker run -d --name node-container -p 3000:3000 node-cloud-app
50. Check the running container by typing: docker ps
51. Test the application from inside the VM by typing: curl http://localhost:3000
52. You should see the message: Hello from Docker on Cloud VM!
53. View the container logs by typing: docker logs node-container
54. Open a shell inside the running container by typing: docker exec -it node-container sh
55. Inside the container, type: ls
56. Type: exit to leave the container shell.
57. Inspect the container configuration by typing: docker inspect node-container
58. Stop the container by typing: docker stop node-container
59. Check stopped containers by typing: docker ps -a
60. Remove the stopped container by typing: docker rm node-container
61. Check the Docker images by typing: docker images
62. Remove the test image by typing: docker rmi node-cloud-app
63. Verify that the test container and image have been removed by typing: docker ps -a and docker images
64. Clean up any remaining temporary Docker resources created during the practical, if required by the lab.
65. Close the SSH session after completing the practical.

Note: Use the temporary Cloud Skills Boost project and VM only. Do not use production resources. Stop/remove the test container and image after completing the practical.


